=head1 NAME

pam_oar_adopt - OAR's pam_exec script to manage ssh connections to OAR nodes

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<pam_oar_adopt -a> for PAM account

B<pam_oar_adopt -s> for PAM session

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This script is part of the OAR resources and jobs manager software.

PAM can be configured to let users B<ssh> (basic ssh, not via B<oarsh>) to OAR nodes and place the created processes in the job's cgroup. It will also prevent any ssh connection to nodes that are not properly reserved.

This uses the B<pam_exec> module with the B<pam_oar_adopt> script and the B<pam_env> module.

Once enabled, if a user has reserved a node and then connects to it using ssh, PAM will find out the job's B<cgroup> and place the ssh remote process in it. It will also load the job's environment variables.

If a user tries to ssh to a node that is either not reserved, or not reserved in full (all compute resources of the node must be reserved) or reserved multiple times (e.g. 2 different jobs reserving each a subset of the node's compute resources, or using the timesharing job type), the connection will fail.

Please note that while using ssh is very convenient, B<oarsh> provides extra features to connect to jobs.

=head1 CONFIGURATION

To B<enable> this feature, one must configure B<pam_oar_adopt> in PAM and make sure the B</etc/oar/pam_oar_adopt_enabled> file exists on nodes. Removing this file allows one to disable B<pam_oar_adopt> (let I<ssh> return to its normal behavior) without requiring to undo the whole PAM configuration.

Also make sure the B<ssh> service (on port 22, not OAR's dedicated ssh service on port 6667) enables PAM. B</etc/ssh/sshd_config> must contain:

 UsePAM yes

Follows an example of configuration of PAM with B<pam_oar_adopt>:

=over

=item B</etc/pam.d/common-account>

The following can be set as the first PAM directive in common-account:

 account required      pam_exec.so quiet debug stdout /usr/sbin/pam_oar_adopt -a

=item B</etc/pam.d/common-session> and B</etc/pam.d/common-session-noninteractive>

The following can be set as the last PAM directives in common-session and common-session-noninteractive:

 session required   pam_exec.so stdout /usr/sbin/pam_oar_adopt -s
 session optional   pam_env.so readenv=1 envfile=/var/lib/oar/pam.env

=back

=head1 NOTES

It is a good practice to prevent users to connect to OAR nodes outside of jobs (except system users: at least root and the B<oar> user).

Configuring B<pam_oar_adopt> does it, but it can also be enforced using B<pam_access> or the AllowedUsers directive in B</etc/ssh/sshd_config>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

pam(7), pam.conf(5), pam.d(5), pam_exec(8), pam_env(7), pam_access(8), ssh(1), sshd_config(5), oarsh(1)

=head1 COPYRIGHTS

 Copyright 2003-2025 Laboratoire d'Informatique de Grenoble (http://www.liglab.fr). This software is licensed under the GNU General Public License Version 2 or above. There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
